---
layout: post
title:  "Some cases for TDD"
date:   2024-05-12 10:21:52 +0000
categories: Software testing
---

# Introduction

I will argue that software development consists of the following steps:

<div style="padding:20px; font-size:18pt">
<ol>
 <li>Figuring out requirements</li>

 <li>Implementing functionality meeting the requirements</li>

 <li>Fixing broken functionality</li>

 <li>Test the newly implemented functionality</li>
</ol>
</div>

These steps doesn't necessarily come in chronological order. Indeed, some
of the steps are made simultaneously.

## Figuring out requirements

Obviously, one needs to figure out what needs to be done. Requirements
comes out of some business or technical need. These requirements can be
written down in a document, or they can basically be some sort of verbal
agreement between the developer and the business owner (which can also 
be the same person, which makes communication vastly easier).

## Implementing new functionality meeting the requirements

Once requirements have been figured out, one can proceed to implement functionality
which meets these requirements.

This is what most developers consider the _fun_ part of software development.

However, the _fun_ part of development can easily come to a halt once you
reach the next part of the development:

## Fixing broken functionality

While implementing functionality, it is almost impossible to get everything right
in the first go. Actually, getting things right in the first go will make most 
senior developers uneasy. "I got it right in the first try... Something must be
wrong!".

The more code you write, the more difficult the debugging task become. The quick
pace of development quickly grinds to a halt. This part of development is not
the "fun" part.

Last, but not least, the last part of software development. Testing.

## Test the newly implemented functionality

Now, some of you might not think that you are doing testing of the software that
you develop. The software just does what it is supposed to when you run it, right.
Well. That _is_ a form of testing. Manual testing with yourself as the tester.
I sincerely hope that none of you deliver software without having done _any_ tests.
Essentially, this would mean that you have actually followed through with the joke
saying: "it compiles - ship it".

So, I think that we can establish that testing is a necessary step of software
development.

## Is fixing broken functionality really a necessary step?

I would argue, that it is _not_. You can still deliver high-quality software without
having to go through lengthy debugging sessions, and long nights fixing broken
functionality.

Now, saying that you never need to fix broken functionality is maybe a bit of a
stretch. I will still argue that one can certainly limit the amount of time spent
in this phase by moving testing earlier in the development workflow.

## TDD

By employing TDD in your workflow, you will never add much functionality in any step,
and the functionality you have already added will be covered by automated tests.
Therefore, is is most likely the code you have just added that has broken the
functionality.

Actually, breaking functionality is an integrated part of TDD development cycle. But
the whole idea of TDD is that you will not have broken functionality for long enough
for this to become as issue.

## Validating requirements

One thing we haven't touched upon, is how TDD can help us in another step of the
process. Figuring out requirements.

By moving the the test part early in the process, one needs to validate the
requirements before starting coding. If the requirements are vague or incomplete,
you will not be able to write tests for them. If a requirement is hard to write
a test for, maybe the requirement has an issue. This is quite likely, as requirements
is still one of the hardest thing to get right in software.

Testing can actually be moved so early in the development process, that they
go before requirements. By thinking about how one can test a requirement, instead
of just writing a requirement, you make sure that the requirement is clear and
unambiguous.

## Closing remarks

I hope this article has helped in making you realising, that pushing testing
to the earliest phase of the development effort can avoid many of the problems
that take the fun out of software development. After all, one of the most
enjoyable parts of software development is delivering cool functionality to
users quickly.
